Hello again.
In this video, we are going to look at using condition variables with a predicate.
In fact, there is a rather serious problem with the code that I showed you in the last video. You may
have noticed that I started the write thread before the reader thread.
It would have made more sense in the discussion to start the reader thread first.
In fact, I was using some code that was meant to demonstrate the problem that I am talking about.
So let's go ahead and do that now, actually. So I am going to put a sleep in here to make sure that
the writer thread completes before the reading thread starts up.
And let's change that to one second just to make sure that it does finish.
And then when we run this...
So we're waiting... Still waiting...
We are going to wait forever,
in fact. (Let's get out of that) So what is happening?
So the writer thread, it runs first.
It sends the notification to the condition variable.
Then the writer thread will exit. Then the reader thread will run. It will call wait.
And the problem is that this call will block indefinitely until the condition variable receives the
notification, but the notification has already been received.
So this waits for ever.
So this is the problem. wait() will block until the notification is received. If the writing thread sends
the notification before the reading thread calls wait(), then the reader will block further. The
"wake up!" has been lost.
So, in fact, this is a race condition.
There is also a very obscure problem, so there are actually two problems with the code.
It is possible for the waiting thread to be woken up, for the wait() call to return, even though
the writing thread has not actually notified the condition variable.
And this is known as a spurious wake up.
This is actually due to a race condition in the condition variable itself.
So it is not just application programmers
who have problems with data races!
It is actually possible to implement the condition variable in such a way that it does not suffer from
spurious wakeups, but that would involve too much overhead.
Fortunately, there is a solution that C++ provides for this.
And even better, it also solves the problem with the lost wakeup.
The solution is that wait() will take a second argument, which is some kind of callable argument, it is
a predicate function.
The typical scenario is that this predicate function will check the value of a shared boolean. Initially
this bool has the value false and then when the writing thread modifies the data, it sets it to true.
The waiting thread will check this bool by calling this predicate, and it will only continue executing
if the predicate returns true.
So to use this, you need to first add a shared boolean flag to the code and then in the wait() call,
we need to provide a callable object, which is going to check this flag.
So here we have got our wait() call on the unique lock.
And then as the second argument, we have the predicate function. And lambda functions are ideal for
this.
So here is some code that will do this. I have adapted the previous code to use the predicate.
Here is the
boolean flag with the initial value false.
Here is the call to wait() with the predicate as the second argument, which just checks the value of that flag.
I have also added a print statement so we can see when the threads actually run.
And then in the writing thread, we set the condition to true.
Notice that we do this when the mutex is locked, so this will prevent a race condition on the boolean.
As far as the reader is concerned, the mutex will be temporarily locked while this is checked.
So there is no possibility of a data race.
And the rest of the program is the same, I think...
Yes. I have put in a sleep and...
Okay, so let's try this.
So there we are, we can see that the writing thread finishes before the reading thread starts, but
the reading thread is able to return from the call to wait() and access the modified value of the shared
data.
So how does this prevent the lost wakeup scenario? When the wait() function is called by the reader,
the wait() function will call the predicate internally. At that point,
the mutex is still locked.
If the predicate returns true, this means that the writing thread has already set the condition to
true.
So that means it must have already sent a notification.
And in that case, the thread will resume execution with the mutex still locked, and it will carry on
and do something with the shared data.
If the predicate function returns false, that means the writer has not yet sent a notification.
And then we have the normal scenario.
So we release the lock and wait for a notification to be sent by the condition variable.
For avoiding spurious wakeup. Remember, this is when the condition variable notifies the waiting
thread.
Even though the writing thread hasn't sent a notification.
So when the waiting thread gets the notification, it will acquire a lock on the mutex. If the predicate
returns true, then we know that the writing thread
must have sent a notification because it has set the condition variable, which is all part of the same
code.
And in that case, it is safe to resume execution and we are still executing under the lock.
If the predicate returns false, that means the writing threat has not set the boolean, so it cannot
have sent a notification.
So this is a false wake up.
In that case, we release the lock and continue waiting. So you can see that this completely solves the
problem with lost wakeups and spurious wake ups.
So we should always use a predicate function when we are using a condition variable.
So always add a second argument to wait().
And finally, the real value from condition variables is when you have multiple threads waiting for
the same event. As we said, there are two different member functions that can be called by the writing
thread.
They can call notify underscore all which will cause all the threads which are waiting on
that condition variable to be woken up.
The threads can wake up in any order, and this will cause all the reader threads to start processing
their data.
Alternatively, we can call notify underscore one.
And in this case, only one of the threads which is waiting on that condition variable will be woken
up. And it could be any one of the waiting threads.
The other threads which have called wait() will remain
blocked until they eventually get their wake up call.
And then once one thread has been notified, it cannot be notified again by the same condition variable.
So we get a different thread processing the data each time.
In this version, I am going to start up three reading threads.
Each reading threat is going to print out its ID so we can see what is happening. The rest of the code
is the same.
In the modifying thread, we were originally calling notify_one, so let's call that first and then see what happens.
OK, so all of the three reading threads have started running. Then the data has been written, but only
one of the reading threads has actually been woken up and is processing the data.
The other two are still waiting.
And because we are only sending the notification once, the other two threads will not get a notification.
So they're going to wait forever.
So I will have to interrupt that.
Now I am going to call notify_one() three times, once for each thread.
So we should expect to see all the threads getting data and yes, there we are.
And the three threads have been able to get their data.
And then finally, I am going to call notify_all().
So this should have the same effect, all three threads should run and be able to get their data.
So there we are.
Each time that notify_one() is called, one of the waiting threads is woken up.
And when notify_all() is called, all the waiting threads are woken up.
Okay, so that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time.
But meanwhile, keep coding!